@c This file is part of the pound manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2024 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c This file is distributed under GFDL 1.3 or any later version
@c published by the Free Software Foundation.

This appendix describes metric families returned in the output of
@dfn{openmetrics} @command{pound} backends (@pxref{Metrics}).

@deftypevr {Metric family} gauge pound_workers
Number of pound workers (@pxref{Worker model}).  Indexed by types:

@table @samp
@item active
Number of workers currently active.
@item count
Number of workers running (both idle and active).
@item min
Minimum number of workers as set by the @code{WorkerMinCount}
configuration directive (@pxref{Global directives, WorkerMinCount}).
@item max
Maximum number of workers as set by the @code{WorkerMaxCount}
configuration directive (@pxref{Global directives, WorkerMaxCount}).
@end table

Example:

@example
@group
pound_workers@{type="active"@} 2
pound_workers@{type="count"@} 5
pound_workers@{type="max"@} 128
pound_workers@{type="min"@} 5
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} stateset pound_listener_enabled
State of a listener: enabled/disabled.  Indexed by the listener
ordinal number.

@example
@group
pound_listener_enabled@{listener="0"@} 1
pound_listener_enabled@{listener="1"@} 0
pound_listener_enabled@{listener="2"@} 1
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} info pound_listener_info
Description of a listener.  Each instance contains the following
indices:

@table @samp
@item listener
Listener ordinal number.

@item name
Listener name, as set in the @code{ListenHTTP} or @code{ListenHTTPS}
statement (@pxref{ListenHTTP}).

@item address
Listener address.  For INET family, it is formatted as
@samp{@var{IP}:@var{PORT}}, for UNIX sockets, it is the pathname of
the socket.

@item protocol
Either @samp{http} or @samp{https}.
@end table

The value of this metrics is always @samp{1}.

@example
@group
pound_listener_info@{listener="0",name="",address="/run/pound.sock",protocol="http"@} 1
pound_listener_info@{listener="1",name="plain",address="0.0.0.0:80",protocol="http"@} 1
pound_listener_info@{listener="2",name="tls",address="0.0.0.0:443",protocol="https"@} 1
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} info pound_service_info
Description of a service.  Indices:

@table @code
@item listener
Listener ordinal number.  This index is absent for globally defined
services.

@item service
Index of the service in listener (or in global configuration, for
globally defined services).

@item name
Service name as set in the @code{Service} definition
(@pxref{Service}).
@end table

@example
@group
pound_service_info@{listener="0",service="0",name=""@} 1
pound_service_info@{listener="1",service="0",name=""@} 1
pound_service_info@{listener="1",service="1",name="redirect"@} 1
pound_service_info@{listener="2",service="0",name="metrics"@} 1
pound_service_info@{listener="2",service="1",name="web"@} 1
pound_service_info@{service="0",name="fallback"@} 1
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} stateset pound_service_enabled
State of a particular service.

@example
@group
pound_service_enabled@{listener="0",service="0"@} 1
pound_service_enabled@{listener="1",service="0"@} 1
pound_service_enabled@{listener="2",service="0"@} 1
pound_service_enabled@{service="0"@} 1
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} gauge pound_backends
Number of backends per service: total, alive, enabled, and active
(both alive and enabled).  Indices:

@table @code
@item listener
Listener ordinal number.  This index is absent for globally defined
services.

@item service
Index of the service in listener (or in global configuration, for
globally defined services).

@item state
Backend state: @samp{total}, @samp{alive}, @samp{enabled}, or
@samp{active}.
@end table

Example:

@example
@group
pound_backends@{listener="0",service="0",state="total"@} 5
pound_backends@{listener="0",service="0",state="enabled"@} 3
pound_backends@{listener="0",service="0",state="alive"@} 3
pound_backends@{service="0",state="total"@} 1
pound_backends@{service="0",state="enabled"@} 1
pound_backends@{service="0",state="alive"@} 1
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} stateset pound_backend_state
State of each backend.  Indices:

@table @code
@item listener
Listener ordinal number.  This index is absent for globally defined
services.

@item service
Index of the service in listener (or in global configuration, for
globally defined services).

@item backend
Index of the backend in service.

@item state
@samp{enabled}: whether the backend is enabled or not.
@* @samp{alive}: whether the backend is alive or not.
@end table

Example:

@example
@group
pound_backend_state@{listener="0",service="0",backend="0",state="alive"@} 1
pound_backend_state@{listener="0",service="0",backend="0",state="enabled"@} 1
pound_backend_state@{listener="0",service="0",backend="1",state="alive"@} 1
pound_backend_state@{listener="0",service="0",backend="1",state="enabled"@} 0
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} gauge pound_backend_requests
Number of requests processed by backend.  This metrics is available
only if backend statistics is enabled (@pxref{BackendStats}).

Example:

@example
@group
pound_backend_requests@{listener="0",service="0",backend="0"@} 40587
pound_backend_requests@{listener="1",service="0",backend="0"@} 13858
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} gauge pound_backend_request_time_avg_nanoseconds
Average time per request spent in backend (nanoseconds).  This metrics
is available only if backend statistics is enabled (@pxref{BackendStats}).

@example
@group
pound_backend_request_time_avg_nanoseconds@{listener="0",service="0",backend="0"@} 156254
pound_backend_request_time_avg_nanoseconds@{listener="1",service="2",backend="0"@} 26147
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Metric family} gauge pound_backend_request_stddev_nanoseconds
Standard deviation of the average time per request.  This metrics
is available only if backend statistics is enabled (@pxref{BackendStats}).

@example
@group
pound_backend_request_stddev_nanoseconds@{listener="0",service="0",backend="0"@} 0
pound_backend_request_stddev_nanoseconds@{listener="1",service="2",backend="0"@} 59
@end group
@end example
@end deftypevr
