.\" Pound - the reverse-proxy load-balancer
.\" Copyright (C) 2002-2010 Apsis GmbH
.\" Copyright (C) 2018-2022 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" Pound is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Pound is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with pound.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH POUNDCTL 8 "December 1, 2022" "poundctl" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
poundctl \- control the pound daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
.B poundctl \fI-c /path/to/socket\fR [\fI-L/-l\fR] [\fI-S/-s\fR] [\fI-B/-b\fR] [\fI-N/-n\fR] [\fI-H\fR] [\fI-X\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Poundctl
controls various aspects of the operation of the
.I pound(8)
program.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available:
.TP
\fB\-c /path/to/socket\fR
The path to the (Unix-domain) socket
.B pound
was configured to listen on for control. Your
.B pound
configuration file must contain the directive
.I Control "/path/to/socket"
for
.B poundctl
to work.
.TP
\fB\-L/\-l \fIn\fR
Enable/disable a listener. A disabled listener will stop accepting connection
requests.
.TP
\fB\-S/\-s \fIn m\fR
Enable/disable a service. A disabled service will not be used by
.B pound
to answer requests.
.TP
\fB\-B/\-b \fIn m r\fR
Enable/disable a back-end. A disabled back-end will not be passed requests to
answer. Note however that existing sessions may still cause requests to be
sent their way.
.TP
\fB\-N \fIn m k r\fR
Add a session to service m in listener n. The session key is k and it points to
back-end r.
.TP
\fB\-n \fIn m k\fR
Remove a session from service m in listener n. The session key is k.
.PP
The parameters \fIn\fR, \fIm\fR and \fIr\fR refer to the number
assigned to a particular listener, service and back-end in the
listings. A listener number of -1 refers by convention to the global
context.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR
Try to resolve the addresses to symbolic names. Depending on your configuration,
this may require an active DNS.
.TP
\fB\-X\fR
Show the results in XML format.
.PP
When called without flags
.B poundctl
will print out a listing of the
.B pound
internal state.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Robert Segall, Apsis GmbH, and Sergey Poznyakoff.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <gray@gnu.org>.  You may also use github issue tracker
at https://github.com/graygnuorg/pound/issues.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2002-2010 Apsis GmbH.
.br
Copyright \(co 2018-2022 Sergey Poznyakoff
.sp
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.sp
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:
